In metazoan organisms, the oxygen delivery and cellular adaptation to oxygen deprivation are accelerated through the hypoxic signaling pathway in order to sustain oxygen homeostasis [130]. Lack of oxygen supply or an excessive oxygen consumption could result in insufficient oxygen levels for maintaining normal cellular function, a condition defined as hypoxia. Hypoxia may not be considered as the inequivalent to ambient oxygen concentration (21% oxygen) as many tissues physiologically function at levels equal to 5% oxygen or even as low as 1% oxygen [61]. Mostly, hypoxia is referred to the relatively low (generally < 2%) oxygen content compared to normal status in a given organ, tissue, or cell type. Hypoxia is a state of continuously lack of oxygen for a short (acute hypoxia, e.g., ischemia) or long (chronic hypoxia, e.g., chronic kidney disease, cancer) period of time. Therefore, a wider range of oxygen concentrations and feedback to acute stresses from seconds to days, even weeks to months, shall be put into consideration when referring the mechanisms of pathophysiological relevancies.
Hypoxia is usually considered to have pathological effects; however, it also involves in maintaining normal physiological functions. Taking human as an example, the central and peripheral chemoreceptors sense the reduction of oxygen tension and send signals to respiratory center in medulla and pons, where a series of processes are initiated to increase pulmonary ventilation and cardiac output to maintain normal functions of human body. Oxygen exchange occurs in the alveoli of lung with more than 95% of oxygen diffuses into the capillary vessels via the alveolar-capillary exchange system and then binds to hemoglobin. The oxygenated blood returns to left atrium through pulmonary vein. The heart then pumps out the oxygenated blood from left ventricle to its periphery to maintain the proper function of every single cell. In this minireview, we will not discuss the physiological effects of hypoxia but focus on pathological impacts of hypoxia in several key human diseases including cancer, cardiovascular diseases, chronic kidney diseases, metabolic diseases, preeclampsia, and endometriosis. Understanding the disease pathological process shall help us dissecting the molecular mechanisms of causing the disorders and designing better therapeutic regimens against them.
Molecular basis of hypoxia in regulating gene expression
Oxygen is essentially required by most eukaryotic organisms as a scavenger to remove harmful electron and hydrogen ions generated as by-products of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. At the cellular level, adaptation involves a switch of energy metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation to anaerobic glycolysis, which increases glucose uptake, and expression of stress proteins related to cell survival or death [22]. All nucleated cells can sense oxygen concentration and respond to reduced oxygen availability in one of two distinctive ways. Alterations of preexisting proteins (such as phosphorylation or changing redox state) primarily occur in response to acute hypoxia (within minutes) while alterations in gene expression principally occur in response to chronic hypoxia (lasting from minutes to hours or longer). The expression of hypoxia responsive genes is mainly regulated by hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)- or nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)- dependent manners. There are three HIF-αs (HIF-1α, −2α, and -3α) identified thus far [128]. All three HIFs dimerize with constitutively expressed HIF-1β (also known as aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator, ARNT) to form a heterodimeric functional unit. HIF-1α is expressed in most, if not all, human tissues [165] while HIF-2α and HIF-3α are expressed in more restricted tissues and developing stages such as fetal lung or developing vascular endothelium [39, 43, 146]. In reflecting to their specific tissue expression patterns, HIF-1α appears to play a general role in transcriptional regulation of all cells in response to hypoxia whereas HIF-2α and HIF-3α play more limited or specialized roles in oxygen homeostasis. Under normoxia, HIF-αs protein are hydroxylated by prolyl-hydroxylases (PHDs) and factor inhibiting HIF (FIH). These two oxygen-dependent enzymes are activated under normoxia and suppress HIF-αs activity via distinct mechanisms. PHDs catalyze the proline hydroxylation of HIF-αs so the E3 ubiquitin ligase, von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) can bind to HIF-αs protein and promote the degradation via the ubiquitin proteasome degradation pathway (Fig. 1). FIH hydroxylates the asparagine residue in the C-terminal transactivation domain of HIF-αs prevents the recruitment of transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and its homolog, p300, and thus inhibits HIF-αs transcription activity. In addition, PHDs and FIH can inactivate NF-κB by direct hydroxylation of inhibitor of κB kinase (IKK) complex [159]. Under hypoxia, insufficient oxygen inhibits the activity of PHDs, thus prevents HIF-αs from VHL-dependent protein degradation. In addition, mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) phosphorylate HIF-αs, which also increases the stability of α subunit. The phosphorylated HIF-αs protein translocate to the nucleus and associate with HIF-1β, which forms a HIF-1α/β heteroduplex and binds to the hypoxia responsive element (HRE) of target genes. Suppression of FIH activity under hypoxia results in increasing CBP/p300 recruitment to enhance the transcription of HIF target genes [60, 130]. Besides, lack of oxygen molecules prevents hydroxylation of IKK. Nonhydroxylated IKK complex promotes the phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation of inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB). Therefore, NF-κB is released and translocates to the nucleus to regulate the transcription of target genes [32].